---
category: Observability
Done: true
tags:
  - pod
  - probes
  - monitoring
created: 2024-01-11T15:04
updated: 2024-02-01T12:49
---
# Observability

## Probes
When creating a new pod, there a few statuses it has to go through in order for it to start working (e.g. receive traffic):
- **PodScheduled (T/F)**
- **Initialized (T/F)**
- **ContainersReady (T/F)**
- **Ready (T/F)** : application is running and ready to accept traffic
Each of these statuses are set to *true* when the pod reaches them.

Depending on the application inside the pod, it may take some time until the app is ready and started. But during the *booting* process of the app, the pod is **Ready** for kubernetes, so that would be incorrect.

E.g. the app is a web server which takes ~20s to boot up. When the container is created, kubernetes sets **ready=true** and the load balancer starts to send traffic to the pod. The application isn't ready, so all requests fail, which is bad, there should be a way to tell kubernetes an app is ready to accept traffic.

### Readiness Probe
This is a probe (*test*) that tests if the app is ready. You can test by executing a command, making an HTTP request or some other way.

```yaml
spec:
  containers:
   - name: my_container
     readinessProbe:
      httpGet:
        path: /my/health/path
        port: 80
```

So now, kubernetes sets **ready=true** only when the readiness probe is successfull.

There are other options to set up the probe:
- `httpGet`: runs a http request
- `tcpSocket`: uses a socket to test connection 
- `exec`: executes a custom command

You can also set up:
- `initialDelaySeconds`: after how many seconds the probe should start 
- `periodSeconds`: how often should the probe run
- `failureThreshold`: how many failed attempts of the probe to allow before restarting the pod
### Liveness Probe
A liveness probe checks whether the application inside the pod is still alive. 
Sometimes it may happen that the pod results as `ready` but the app running inside is not working (because of an error etc...). So it's best practice to set up a **liveness probe** that continuously checks the application to see if it is still alive and working.

It can be configured just like a **Readiness probe**.
```yaml
readinessProbe:
	...
livenessProbe:
  httpGet:
    path: /health
    port: 80
  initialDelaySeconds: 10
  failureThreshold: 20
  periodSeconds: 5
```

## Logging
To view the logs of a pod use:
`k logs <my_pod>` - add `-f` to `follow` the output of logs of the pod
If you have more than one container running in the pod you can specify it like so:
`k logs <my_pod> <my_container> -f`

## Metrics
Kubernetes does not come with a default fully-featured monitoring platform. Usually it's best practice to install an external software stack that does monitoring (e.g. ELK stack, Prometheus etc..).

The basic monitoring software running in a kubernetes is the `metrics-server`, which is an **in-memory** app collecting data from the nodes. Each node, in its **kubelet** component, has a `cAdvisor` (Container Advisor) responsible from retrieving performance metrics form pods and exposing them through the *kubelet* API making them available to the *metrics-server*.

The **Metrics Server** must be installed first, it does not come with default kubernetes.

Some useful commands:
- `k top node` -> view CPU/Memory consumption of each node
- `k top pod` -> view performance metrics of pods