---
category: Management
tags:
  - istio
created: 2024-03-10T10:43
updated: 2024-03-10T11:58
---
<small> Note: these notes are all taken from the official <a href="https://istio.io/latest/docs/concepts/traffic-management/"> Istio documentation</a></small>

<hr>

# General
Istio lets you set up traffic rules to **control** the **flow of traffic** and API calls between services.
Traffic management model relies on the *Envoy* proxies deployed on your services since all traffic that your mesh services send and receive is *proxied* through Envoy.
## Table of Contents
- [[#Introduction|Introduction]]
- [[#Virtual Services|Virtual Services]]
	- [[#Virtual Services#Why?|Why?]]
	- [[#Virtual Services#Example|Example]]
		- [[#Example#The hosts field|The hosts field]]
		- [[#Example#Routing rules|Routing rules]]
		- [[#Example#Other examples|Other examples]]
- [[#Destination Rules|Destination Rules]]
		- [[#Example#Load balancing|Load balancing]]
		- [[#Example#Destination rule example|Destination rule example]]
- [[#Gateways|Gateways]]
		- [[#Example#Example|Example]]
- [[#Service Entries|Service Entries]]
		- [[#Example#Example|Example]]
- [[#Sidecars|Sidecars]]
		- [[#Example#Example|Example]]


## Introduction
First of all, Istio needs to discover all you endpoints and which services they belong to, so, in order to populate its *service registry*, Istio connects to a **service discovery system.**  
Thanks to this service registry *Envoy* proxies can direct traffic to relevant services, using by default a **least request model** i.e. sends the requests to the service with the *fewer active requests*, so the most heavily loaded hosts will not receive requests until it is no more loaded than any other host. 

Like other Istio configuration, the API is specified using Kubernetes custom resource definitions (CRDs), which you can configure using YAML.

The resources the Istio API exposes are the following:
- [[#Virtual Services]]
- [[#Destination Rules]]
- [[#Gateways]]
- [[#Service Entries]]
- [[#Sidecars]]

## Virtual Services
Lets you configure *how requests are routed to a service* within an Istio service mesh. Each VS consists of a **set of routing rules** evaluated in order, letting istio match each request to the VS to a specific real destination within the mesh. You can have *none to many*, depending on your use-case.

### Why?
**Without virtual services**, Envoy distributes traffic using *least requests load balancing* between all service instances, as described in the introduction. 

**With a virtual service**, you can specify traffic behavior for one or more hostnames. You use routing rules in the virtual service that tell Envoy how to send the virtual service’s traffic to appropriate destinations. *Route destinations can be different versions of the same service or entirely different services*.

A typical **use case** is to send traffic to different versions of a service, specified as service subsets. Clients send requests to the virtual service host *as if it was a single entity*, and Envoy then *routes* the traffic to the *different versions* depending on the virtual service *rules*: for example, “20% of calls go to the new version” or “calls from these users go to version 2”. This **allows** you to, for instance, create a **canary rollout** where you gradually increase the percentage of traffic that’s sent to a new service version. **The traffic routing is completely separate from the instance deployment**, meaning that the number of instances implementing the new service version can scale up and down based on traffic load without referring to traffic routing at all.

### Example
The following virtual service routes requests to different versions of a service depending on whether the request comes from a particular user.
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: reviews
spec:
  hosts:
  - reviews
  http:
  - match:
    - headers:
        end-user:
          exact: jason
    route:
    - destination:
        host: reviews
        subset: v2
  - route:
    - destination:
        host: reviews
        subset: v3
```

#### The hosts field
The `hosts` field lists the virtual service’s hosts - in other words, the user-addressable destination or **destinations** that these routing rules apply to i.e.  **the address the client uses when sending requests to the service**.
Can be an **IP**, **DNS name**, or a short name (e.g. Kubernetes service name) that resolves to a **FQDN**. Wildcard prefixes are allowed.
#### Routing rules
The `http` section contains the virtual service’s routing rules, describing **match conditions and actions** for routing `HTTP/1.1`, `HTTP2`, and `gRPC` traffic sent to the destination(s) specified in the hosts field (you can also use `tcp` and `tls` sections to configure routing rules for **TCP** and **unterminated TLS** traffic).

**Match**
In  this case you want this routing to apply to all requests from the user *jason*, so you use the headers, end-user, and exact fields to select the appropriate requests.

```yaml
- match:
   - headers:
       end-user:
         exact: jason
```

**Destination**
Specifies the actual destination for traffic that matches this condition.
Unlike the virtual service’s host(s), the destination’s host **must** be a **real destination** that exists in Istio’s **service registry** or Envoy won’t know where to send traffic to it.
In this case we’re running on Kubernetes and the host name is a Kubernetes service name and the subset `v2` (check [[#Destination Rules]]).

```yaml
route:
- destination:
    host: reviews
    subset: v2

```

**Routing rules are evaluated in sequential order from top to bottom**
#### Other examples
This virtual service lets users send traffic to *two separate services*, ratings and reviews, as if they were part of a bigger virtual service at `http://bookinfo.com/.` The virtual service rules *match* *traffic* based on request *URIs* and direct requests to the appropriate service.

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: bookinfo
spec:
  hosts:
    - bookinfo.com
  http:
  - match:
    - uri:
        prefix: /reviews
    route:
    - destination:
        host: reviews
  - match:
    - uri:
        prefix: /ratings
    route:
    - destination:
        host: ratings

```

You can add **multiple match conditions** to the same `match` block to **AND** your conditions, or add **multiple match blocks** to the same `rule` to **OR** your conditions. You can also have multiple routing rules for any given virtual service.  Check [`HTTPMatchRequest` reference](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/virtual-service/#HTTPMatchRequest).

In addition to using match conditions, you can distribute traffic by percentage `weight`. This is useful for A/B testing and canary rollouts:
```yaml
spec:
  hosts:
  - reviews
  http:
  - route:
    - destination:
        host: reviews
        subset: v1
      weight: 75
    - destination:
        host: reviews
        subset: v2
      weight: 25
```

Check the [`HTTPRoute` reference](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/virtual-service/#HTTPRoute) to learn about more routing actions (URL rewrite, retry policy and headers append/remove).

## Destination Rules
You can think of virtual services as how you route your traffic to a given destination, and then you use destination rules to configure **what happens** to traffic for that **destination**. Destination rules **are applied after virtual service routing rules** are evaluated, so they apply to the traffic’s “real” destination.

They let you specify **named service subsets**, such as **grouping** all a given service’s instances by version. You can then use these service subsets in the routing rules of virtual services to control the traffic to different instances of your service.
Also they let you customize Envoy’s **traffic policies** when calling the entire destination service or a particular service subset, such as your preferred load balancing model, TLS security mode, or circuit breaker settings. You can see a complete list of destination rule options in the Destination Rule reference.

#### Load balancing
By default, Istio uses a **least requests load balancing policy**, where requests are distributed among the instances with the least number of requests. Other types of supported policies are:
- Random: Requests are forwarded at random to instances in the pool.
- Weighted: Requests are forwarded to instances in the pool according to a specific percentage.
- Round robin: Requests are forwarded to each instance in sequence.

See the [Envoy load balancing documentation](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.5.0/intro/arch_overview/load_balancing) for more information about each option.

#### Destination rule example
This configures 3 subsets for the `my-svc` destination with 3 different lb policies.

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: DestinationRule
metadata:
  name: my-destination-rule
spec:
  host: my-svc
  trafficPolicy:
    loadBalancer:
      simple: RANDOM
  subsets:
  - name: v1
    labels:
      version: v1
  - name: v2
    labels:
      version: v2
    trafficPolicy:
      loadBalancer:
        simple: ROUND_ROBIN
  - name: v3
    labels:
      version: v3
```

Each subset is defined based on one or more `labels`, which in Kubernetes are key/value pairs that are attached to objects such as Pods. These labels are applied in the Kubernetes service’s deployment as `metadata` to identify different versions.
## Gateways
You use a gateway to manage inbound and outbound traffic for your mesh, letting you specify which traffic you want to enter or leave the mesh. Gateway configurations are applied to standalone Envoy proxies that are running at the edge of the mesh, rather than sidecar Envoy proxies running alongside your service workloads.

Gateways are primarily used to manage ingress traffic, but you can also configure egress gateways. An egress gateway lets you configure a dedicated exit node for the traffic leaving the mesh, letting you limit which services can or should access external networks, or to enable [secure control of egress traffic](https://istio.io/latest/blog/2019/egress-traffic-control-in-istio-part-1/) to add security to your mesh,

#### Example
This gateway configuration lets HTTPS traffic from `ext-host.example.com` into the mesh on port 443, but doesn’t specify any routing for the traffic.
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: ext-host-gwy
spec:
  selector:
    app: my-gateway-controller
  servers:
  - port:
      number: 443
      name: https
      protocol: HTTPS
    hosts:
    - ext-host.example.com
    tls:
      mode: SIMPLE
      credentialName: ext-host-cert
```

To specify routing and for the gateway to work as intended, you must also bind the gateway to a virtual service. You do this using the virtual service’s `gateways` field, as shown in the following example:

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: virtual-svc
spec:
  hosts:
  - ext-host.example.com
  gateways:
  - ext-host-gwy
```

## Service Entries
You use a [service entry](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/service-entry/#ServiceEntry) to add an entry to the service registry that Istio maintains internally. 
Configuring service entries allows you to manage traffic for services running outside of the mesh, including the following tasks:

- Redirect and forward traffic for external destinations, such as APIs consumed from the web, or traffic to services in legacy infrastructure.
- Define [retry](https://istio.io/latest/docs/concepts/traffic-management/#retries), [timeout](https://istio.io/latest/docs/concepts/traffic-management/#timeouts), and [fault injection](https://istio.io/latest/docs/concepts/traffic-management/#fault-injection) policies for external destinations.
- Run a mesh service in a Virtual Machine (VM) by [adding VMs to your mesh](https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/virtual-machines/).

> You don’t need to add a service entry for every external service that you want your mesh services to use. By default, Istio configures the Envoy proxies to passthrough requests to unknown services. However, you can’t use Istio features to control the traffic to destinations that aren’t registered in the mesh.
#### Example
The following example mesh-external service entry adds the `ext-svc.example.com` external dependency to Istio’s service registry

```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: ServiceEntry
metadata:
  name: svc-entry
spec:
  hosts:
  - ext-svc.example.com
  ports:
  - number: 443
    name: https
    protocol: HTTPS
  location: MESH_EXTERNAL
  resolution: DNS
```

See the [Service Entry reference](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/service-entry) for more possible configuration options.
## Sidecars
By **default**, Istio configures every Envoy proxy to **accept traffic on all** the ports **of** its associated workload, and to **reach every workload in the mesh** when forwarding traffic. You can use a [sidecar](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/sidecar/#Sidecar) configuration to do the following:
- **Fine-tune** the **set of ports and protocols** that an Envoy proxy accepts.
- **Limit** the **set of services** that the Envoy proxy can reach.

#### Example
The following sidecar configuration configures all services in the `bookinfo` namespace to only reach services running in the same namespace and the Istio control plane (needed by Istio’s egress and telemetry features):
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: Sidecar
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: bookinfo
spec:
  egress:
  - hosts:
    - "./*"
    - "istio-system/*"

```

See the [Sidecar reference](https://istio.io/latest/docs/reference/config/networking/sidecar/) for more details.